The No BS [music] Spiritual Book Club.
The only No BS guide to the best
spiritual books to inspire your own
journey of self-discovery. [music]
Here's your host, founder of the No BS
Spiritual Book Club, Sandy [music] Sedge
Beer. Hello and welcome. Joining me
today to share the 10 best spiritual
books that inspired him the most on his
life journey is award-winning teacher
and international speaker Christopher M.
Bash whose latest book LSD and the mind
of the universe is in my opinion
probably the most important book of our
time. Chris Bash is professor emeritus
in the department of philosophy and
religious studies at Youngstown State
University where he taught for 33 years.
He's a fellow at the institute of
knowetic sciences and advisory board
member for grapersonal training and the
gra foundation. And if you want to know
why I regard LSD and the mind of the
universe as the most important book of
this time, stay tuned. We'll find out
more about that later in the show.
Meanwhile, Chris Bash, welcome to the
show.
>> Thank you, Sandy. It's a pleasure to be
here with you.
>> I'm always intrigued to know what books
our guests will choose, but I've been
especially keen to learn and share with
our audience your 10 best spiritual
books. When I saw it, I saw the list. I
said, "Well, that is one list, the only
one so far where all 10 books have
favorites of mine." [laughter]
>> Well, that's good to hear. Strange.
Yeah.
>> So, how did you how did you find the
process of having to pick your 10? It's
kind of interesting that there were so
many books to choose from and in the
process of choosing the ones that spoke
most deeply to me at any particular time
in my life, um I I found myself kind of
drawn to kind of more intellectually
oriented books because I'm an academic.
Um and at the end I was quite struck by
how much I don't know. You know, the
books helped me so much, but there's
there's so much that uh I've left
untouched in the spiritual field.
>> Wow. Well, I beg to differ and our
audience will find out later why I say
that. I mean, when you say there's so
much you need to know, I would have
thought you know you know what we all
want to know and that's enough. [gasps]
>> It's it's not so much what I need to
know. It's just stuff that I don't know.
Uh I feel content with what I have
learned through my journey. Yeah.
>> But the but the Yeah. Well, the don't
know bit I mean you know we can go on
forever there can. [laughter]
>> So your first book understandably is
Stannis Lafra realms of the human
unconscious realms um observations from
LSD research published in 1975. You're a
great supporter of his work aren't you?
I am uh I think Stan's work is so
critically important to the emerging
paradigm in transpersonal psychology.
>> And I came upon this book right after I
was out of graduate school, just
beginning my teaching career, just
beginning to look around for where to
take my research next. And I came upon
this first book by Stan that was
published just two years before. And as
soon as I read it, it activated
something in me. And I knew I needed to
get involved in this process. Even
though psychedelics were illegal at the
time, this was almost 10 years, eight
years after they had been made illegal.
I nevertheless decided to begin uh what
became a 20-year journey working with uh
LSD in a therapeutic protocol uh that
Stan lays out working with highdose
sessions. Uh not as a clinician, I
wasn't a psychologist. I wasn't
primarily oriented towards healing. I'm
a philosopher of religion by trade. I
was interested in the cosmological
significance of these substances, how
they would give us that had the
potential to show us new insights into
the deep structure of the universe. And
it that book just really sort of lit the
fuse for me.
>> Wow. How old were you then?
>> I was 30 years old. Yeah.
>> Wow. And that started your 20 year
journey.
>> Yeah. Between 30 and 50. That that's
really the book that started it all for
me. And of course, I read all of Stan's
books as they came through. And I always
felt that my books were largely first
and foremost in dialogue with Stan's
work.
>> So book number two, Ian Stevenson, 20
cases suggestive of reincarnation,
published in 1966.
Yeah, I met uh this book at the same
time I met Stan's book. Uh and at the
time I was a deeply convinced agnostic
with strong atheistic leanings. Uh and I
encountered this book by Stevenson which
uh I think presents overwhelming
evidence the first of many books of his
that prevent present overwhelming
evidence that reincarnation is simply a
fact of life. It's a natural fact of
life. Which required that I erase my
entire intellectual blackboard because
reincarnation had never been taken
seriously by any of the courses that I
had taken in college or graduate school.
I had to erase the blackboard and start
from scratch, which resulted eventually
about 10 years later in my publishing my
book on reincarnation, life cycles,
which was my response to Ian Stevenson's
pioneering work.
So when you um
>> I'm getting a bit of feedback now. When
you went down that path, did you risk um
you know the eye of your colleagues?
>> I [laughter] did actually. I went on
sbatical my first sbatical and I had not
planned to write a book. I had not
planned to write this book, but I came
back with the book, the manuscript of
the book, and my colleagues were not
terribly happy with it, but it got
published, and then it got translated
into several foreign languages, and they
began to pay more attention to the
subject matter.
>> So, it didn't affect your career.
>> It didn't. I was afraid that it might uh
when I first did it, but this is a kind
of a personal karmic thing. Uh, I've
paid the penalty for going against the
grain in former lives. This lifetime, it
seems that it's important for me to
continue to go against the grain and not
and and not receive any negative
consequences and only receiving positive
consequences.
>> Book [clears throat] number three,
Journey of Souls: Case Studies of Life
Between Lies by Michael Newton,
published in 1994.
Yeah, Michael Newton's work is so
beautiful and so important. Uh he
started as a past life therapist then
accidentally gave an in an ambiguous
instruction to a client through which he
learned that we could regress people not
only to their former lives but we could
regress people to the time in between
their death and their subsequent
rebirth. and he began to give us a uh an
a [snorts]
um uh not an autobiographical people
individual experiences of what happened
to them in their time between their
incarnations. Uh and his series of books
just were fantastic about this. I they
had not been published when I published
my book at first. Uh but they certainly
do complement it very beautifully. I
mean, he really was a pioneer there,
wasn't he? I mean, so many people I
speak to trained with Michael Newton.
>> Yeah, really was. And uh and his
description of the Bardau existence
concurs with my experience in
psychedelics uh completely with the
provision that I think he's he's seeing
more the lower half of the Bardau, not
the upper edges of the Bardau. But yeah,
>> well, book number four is Lessons from
the Light, what we can learn from the
near-death experience by Kenneth Ring.
And that one was published in 1998.
>> Yeah. I again, which one of these books
by each of these authors like we focus
on? Kenneth Ring has always been a
colleague and friend. He wrote the
forward to life cycles. Uh his work on
near-death episodes was so critically
important. I taught a course for many
years at the university called
transpersonal studies in which we always
included near-death episode research and
I always used Ken Ring's books because
they were so accessible to the students
and so well researched. And this book is
kind of Ken's last book on near-death
episode research. It's an overview. It's
a compendium. It contains beautiful
passages, all sorts of empirical
analysis. But my favorite chapter in the
book comes towards the end where he's
describing the deepest uh near-death
episodes that he has recorded and they
are just magnificent. Personally, as a
psychedelic
oriented person, I feel deepest
compatibility or a deepest resonance
with people who have had deep near-death
episodes.
>> Yeah.
So, continuing the theme, Robert Monroe,
Far Journeys, his best-selling classic,
published in 1985.
>> Yeah, Robert Monroe has been a real
companion to me on the journey through
his works. Um, this book came out when I
was on my first sbatical and I was
writing life cycles and I this book came
out and I immediately uh made a
reservation to go and do a week's
training program at the Monroe Institute
because I was so impressed by his work.
Uh, and then I went back one more time
right after he passed to go back to the
Monroe Institute for a week's training
to say goodbye. Monroe I think is an
underststudied
figure in uh the consciousness
community.
You know maybe it's because he's on the
east coast and doesn't penetrate west
coast circles so much. But the model of
the universe that he presents that
emerged over decades of his going out of
his body every every night every time he
went to sleep is just a a stunning
model. Idiosyncratic very candid. He he
Monroe just says it calls it like he
sees it. Uh but it's a very compatible
model with eastern uh particularly
Buddhist cosmology. The structure of the
Bardau uh the long the large model uh I
think is just a fantastic uh excursion
and I've read it multiple times through
the years.
>> Did you have many journeys when you were
there?
uh you know getting out of my body is
never an aptitude that I seem to have
developed. I when I was there I had
definitely non-ordinary states of
consciousness expansive diffuse and con
states of consciousness where I was able
to make contact for example with people
who had died and were in the Bardau but
they weren't accompanied by the
sensation of being out of my body and
this is true for all my psychedelic work
I never had the sensation of leaving my
body rather my consciousness expanded
exponentially beyond the limits of my
body but not as kind of a separate
consciousness individualized
consciousness traveling out.
>> I always wanted to go there. I never got
there but I did um attend a weekend
session by somebody who had trained to
do it and didn't really work for me.
>> Didn't I was so disappointed.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Book number six um by a man whose
work I love, Dwayne Elgen. Choosing
Earth: Humanity's great transition to a
mature planetary civilization published
um I think that was 2020, but there's
been a new edition published.
>> Yes, he's updated it, put it in a new
edition. Uh Dwayne Elgen is a dear
friend, great colleague, just he's one
of my heroes, one he's been trying to
raise the alarm about humanity's peril
and what we're doing to the planet and
the limitations of our understanding of
the universe, the consequences of buying
into a materialist paradigm instead of a
living universe paradigm. one of his
books, The Living Universe, uh from his
first book on voluntary simplicity,
where he points us where we need to be
going. Reducing our impact uh on the
planet, living a simpler life w with
more focus on what we want to achieve
with our life. Uh not a life of doing
less, but a life of doing more with
less. But this book, Choosing Earth, is
a distillation of decades and decades of
his thinking on the earth. He lays out a
very carefully scientifically informed
proposal for what the next 50 years are
going to look like decade by decade. And
then he follows this with a a series of
of recommendations for how we can
consciously and intelligently engage
this crisis and work to ensure a better
outcome. It's just a it's a beautiful
book and his wife Colleen has produced a
film that is the companion to the book.
So you and they're giving away the book
and giving away the film for free. It is
Dwayne says it's too important. We are
right now things are too important to
try to make money uh out of this peril.
>> Do you know um where people can go to
find um the movie and what's it called?
>> Uh it's called
Oh my goodness, I'm having a senior
moment here. You can go to Dwayne
Elgen's website,
>> dwayneggin.com,
and his books are listed there and the
movie is there. His wife's name is
Colleen Lru Elgen.
>> Yeah,
>> I'll check it out.
>> Yeah.
>> Number seven, another um author whose
work I admire tremendously, Rupert
Sheldrake, A New Science of Life, The
Hypothesis of Morphic Resonance,
published in 1981.
again a person who's written such an
extraordinary series of books.
>> Uh when I was trying to understand, as I
say in my notes here, when I was trying
to understand
why my psychedelic purification,
healing experiences had expanded so
exponentially to include hundreds of
thousands of human beings, the whole
breath of the human species. And later
when I was trying to understand some of
the dynamics that were being that were
showing up in my classroom that seemed
this permeability between my mind and my
students mind. Rupert Sheldre's work was
really helpful to me and very important
because he he helped me understand that
uh our individual minds of of every
being is always also simultaneously
network into a species mind. So that as
the species learns, the individual
learns. As the individual learns, the
species learns and a complex feedback
dynamic. And this was extraordinarily
helpful when I it helped me make the
transition of thinking about what was
happening in my sessions in terms of a
personal model of transformation into a
collective model of transformation. And
this became the primary theme of my
second book, Dark Knight, Early Dawn,
where I'm really talking about the
collective the the dark knight of our
collective soul, the the transformation
of our collective soul. And that has uh
Rupert's fingerprints all over it.
>> He took a lot of flack, didn't he? I
mean, he really has um you know, had to
fight the good fight there. And yet he's
said to me that some of the people who
publicly deny his work
>> privately do not.
>> Yeah. Um too often in academia we have
our public reputations and our private
convictions that don't match our public
positions. Yeah.
>> Sad, isn't it?
>> Yeah.
>> People don't feel that they can be
authentic and say what they think.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And Rupert's been just a
real hero in challenging uh the status
quo in scientific thought and just
pushing and pushing and pushing the
issues on the table that he believes in.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So book number eight,
Richard Tarnis, Cosmos and Psyche,
Intimations of a New World View,
published in 1996.
>> Yeah, Rick Tarnes is another colleague
and dear friend. uh an extraordinary
astrologer. After establishing his
professional reputation as an historian
of of intellectual thought with his book
Passion of the Western Mind, he then
came up with this book Cosmos and Psyche
in which he makes the case that
astrology not only illumines the lives
of individuals and he demonstrates this
very powerfully in the book with known
historical figures, but that astrology
can be used to illumin historical epics
and it's so it's that is the larger
thesis which is so particularly
provocative is his analysis of history
in terms of the rhythms of the of the
archetypal
astrological pulses of our solar system
and showing a correlation between the
quality of the archetypal energies that
are being brought into focus from an
archetype from an astrological lens to
looking at what's actually happening
at an historical level and showing the
correlations. And I think it's an
extraordinarily important uh and very
valuable book, also a real tour to
force. You have to strap in when you
read one of Rick's books.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I'm sure.
>> Yeah.
>> Um I was looking at looking it up
earlier and I think it was the contents
list. One of one of the things on there
that um caught my eye because it really
relates so much to your work and what's
in uh your book, the transformation of
the cosmos, the birth of the modern self
and the dawn of a new universe, which is
pretty much [clears throat] where we are
now, but the birth of the modern self. I
mean, you talk about the future human in
your book. Um what is what is the modern
self?
I think the modern self is the birth
that was given uh is the self sense that
was given birth to in the age of
enlightenment and it's the rational self
it's that gives birth to science the
scientific self u and I think what we're
seeing is now that the modern self is
thoroughly and deeply established the
modern self is someone who like Martin
Luther can pound his 96 thesis on the
door of the cathedral and basically say
to this multiundyear-old religious
tradition of the Roman Catholicism,
you're wrong and you're wrong on this,
this, and this. That self consolidated
within ourselves so that we can become
critical, turn a critical lens on our
history and our culture and our context.
That self now thoroughly established in
history is yielding to a post-modern
self, I think. And that's the future
human that so many of us are feeling,
intuiting, and experiencing uh in our
contemplative practices. The post-modern
self doesn't negate the modern self, but
it reconnects the modern self to the
underlying deeper fabric of
consciousness that runs through all
things, not only through all human
beings, but through all of life. So the
modern self is being recontextualized
within the larger fabric uh of existence
and that is I think the future human and
the way I understand that the technical
parts of that is in terms of the birth
of the diamond soul.
>> Well we will talk more about that after
the break. So book number nine Sri
Orbindo or the adventure of
consciousness by Sat Prem published in
1968.
>> Shrior Rabbindo is one of my heroes.
He's just such a a brilliant man Oxford
educated uh and Hindu uh saint and guru
uh transition from being a political
activist to being a spiritual activist
and uh he more or less channeled all his
books. I mean, apparently all of his
books were written within six years. He
just channeled them, but they're very
dense there. You know, you really have
to sit down with a cup of coffee if
you're going to read Arbindo because
he's so rich. Satre is a has written a
biography which basically extracts the
core insights that that Orbindo
presented in his writing but he does it
in a way which makes them more
accessible to the average reader like me
and I just I really appreciated Sabr
because he gives me a backdoor way into
Orurabindo's thought and he it makes it
easier for me when I want to tangle
tackle the primary text.
>> We had a guest on um a few months ago
who recommended I don't know if it was
this book, but one of his and was
talking about how he and the mother I
believe it was um during the war they
would meditate and they would basically
send thoughts.
>> Yeah.
>> Um you know to Hitler, good thoughts. Um
and they would see and and they'd send
thoughts to Churchill as well. And they
basically sent one particular thought to
Churchill about how he would mobilize
you know the British spirit um you know
to back him completely and in fact
>> what um he then said in his next speech
was almost word for word
>> what they had transmitted.
>> Yeah. Yeah. They just they live in the
truth of the open expanse of mind and
that our individual thoughts and minds
when focus can travel into the ocean of
consciousness and reach your intended
destination.
>> Yes. Yeah. It made me, you know, I've
got to put him on my reading list.
Um the last book is The Flight of the
Garuda, teachings of the Zogchin,
tradition of Tibetan Buddhism by Keith
Dalman, published in 1994.
>> Yeah. Well, uh Vadriana Buddhism has
been a large influence on me and the the
question the challenge I had was which
of the many books that have moved me so
deeply in Buddhism uh could I put here?
uh one that I considered almost put so I
just want to mention is uh the book
graceful exits which is a story of how
great beings enlightened beings die.
It's a collection by oh I'm blanking on
her name of just the the death
experiences of enlightened beings. Uh
but I chose in the end one of my
favorite tantric texts, the flight of
the Garuda, which basically
um was a bit controversial when it was
first published because many traditional
Vadriana practitioners did not believe
that he should have made public such an
esoteric text as this. Personally, I
love it. Uh when I read a tantric text
like this, I'm always bringing to it all
of my background in psychedelic
experience. And when I read this text
and as his commentary, I just feel uh
illumined. I feel so at home with it and
I learn so much from it that helps me
process my own psychedelic experiences.
uh zokchen is considered the fastest
path, the direct path uh in vatriana
Buddhism. It's a form of Buddhist
practice which more or less kind of
starts at the end instead of kind of
developing stage by stage, stage by
stage up the mountain. It kind of um
draws upon the insight that where we end
up at the end of our spiritual practice,
our end of our journey in enlightenment
is in a condition which always existed
from the very beginning. It's not
something which is brought into being
but it is always there. Never changes,
never ceases to exist, never begins to
exist. Once you know that, then you can
build your spiritual practice around the
fact of this pre-existing condition, the
direct path. And that's what this book
is coming out of.
>> Of those 10 books, do you have a
favorite?
>> Oh, [laughter]
I have so many. I guess I' I've lived my
life around the first two uh Stephvenson
and Stan Gra just because I believe that
reincarnation is an absolutely essential
understanding to life and psychedelics
have been the way for me to personally
explore the deep structure of the
universe. So I guess I'd have to say
those but
all of them are favorites of mine.
They're all on my must-read list. Well,
some of these people you know, of those
that you don't know, who would you most
like to meet?
>> Of those I don't know.
[sighs and gasps]
Well, I would love to have met uh
Michael um uh
>> Newton.
>> Newton. Yeah, he's now passed on, so
I'll be looking him up when I die.
That's for sure. Uh just because he's he
contributed so much um to my life. Yeah,
>> I bet you're not the only one who'll be
looking him up.
>> Yes. You know, Mar Monroe says we can go
anywhere and find anyone that we want
when we die. All we have to do is know
their know their ID, you know, and uh so
we can we can check up on people. Uh
>> that'll keep us busy until we come back
again,
>> I guess. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's your 10 best
list, but it's by no means um the whole
of this show. We're going to take a
brief break now and when we get back um
put your listening ears on. Okay.
>> You're listening to a no BS spiritual
book club interview and sharing the 10
best books that had the biggest
influence on his life journey today is
award-winning teacher, international
speaker, and author of the seinal book,
The Mind LSD and the Mind of the
Universe, Diamonds from Heaven. We'll be
back with more from Christopher Bash
after the break. Stay tuned.
Oh times TV
Maya Angelou once said that [music]
there is no greater agony than bearing
an untold story inside you. I'm Sandy
[music] Sedbeer and when I'm not hosting
Om's Media's flagship radio show, What
is going on? And the no BS spiritual
[music] book club, I help people share
their untold stories. Books [music] are
my life, my joy, and my passion. And
there is no greater reward than helping
aspiring writers get their books out of
their [music] heads and into the hands
of those who are waiting to read them.
If you feel that you have a book in you
but don't know where to begin, visit
sedge.com, [music]
click on the work with me tab and find
out how my experience helping others
tell their stories might be just what
you've [music] been looking for. That's
search.com. s e d gbe e r.com.
Imagine becoming a super influencer.
Reinvent yourself. Invest in your brand
and then manifest your success with a
robust spheric approach. Own Times Media
and Broadcasting offers a unique and
multifaceted way to become the spiritual
and conscious influencer you deserve to
be by putting your message [music]
across our powerful platform with its
proven record of integrity and
excellence through our produced shows.
Times offers the opportunity to become a
social media TV personality, a radio
show host, an own times magazine
columnist, and a syndicated podcaster
all in one shot. By live streaming your
show on M Times TV and broadcasting
[music] it across the extensive Ohm
Times radio and TV networks, you become
more than a host. You become [music] an
ambassador and a force for positive
change. Oh times. Open yourself to
[music] the possibilities.
There are 16 [music] million children
struggling with hunger in America.
That's one in five daughters, sons,
neighbors, and [music] classmates who
don't know where their next meal is
coming from. Yet, billions of pounds of
good food [music] go to waste every
year. It's time we do something about
it. Feeding America is a nationwide
network of food banks [music] that helps
provide meals to millions of kids and
families in need. Visit feedingamea.org
to help them feed even more. [music]
Together, we can solve hunger. Together,
we're feeding America.
>> Welcome back, Christopher Bash. In 1979,
you embarked on a life-changing journey.
You said to explore your mind and the
mind of the universe as deeply and as
systematically as possible with the help
of LSD. And over the next 20 years, you
experienced [snorts] 73 highdose
sessions following Stan Graph's
protocols. Um, those journeys which were
intensely grueling and also equally
blissful took you beyond the beyond.
Took you to a place I would love to go
into a unified field of consciousness
that underlies all physical existence.
There's so many questions. So many
questions. We won't have time for all of
them, but why don't you tell us what is
the most important thing that you think
we need to know that you learned on
those journeys?
>> Oh, that's a hard question. First thing
that pops in my mind is don't do what I
did. You know, [laughter]
I I wouldn't do it the same way if I did
it over again, but getting I would be
much gentler on myself. Um, and that's
partly one of the things I learned was I
thought the purpose of this work was to
kind of get to an end state that there
was an end state that would change my
life, transform my life. And what I
learned along the way and I was 17 years
into this journey at this point is that
it's an infinite progression. It's an
infinite universe. You you you'll never
get to the end of it. And so the whole
project of pushing as hard as I did with
the thought that I could get to the end
of it was just it was a mistaken uh
concept that I brought to it.
You know uh what happens in a
psychedelic state is an amplification of
what's taking place in life in ordinary
processes. So in order to understand
what happens in a psychedelic state you
have to know what's life it's what's
happening in ordinary life and here I
think we have to come understand
reincarnation we have to understand that
this is the rhythm of life that we are a
cosmic being that we are a being that
that lives in time frames of hundreds of
thousands millions of years that this
particular incarnation is only one of
many incarnations on this planet in In
order to understand
what life is about, we have to look not
in terms of the one short-term
100-year-old lifespan. We have to think
in terms of the soul's lifespan which is
vast. Uh so that's that's the first
thing is a an underscoring and
reinforcing
of reincarnation.
>> [snorts]
>> uh also
just [clears throat] the encounter with
the living intelligence which is I call
it the the mind of the universe because
our concepts of the divine and God have
so many cultural limitations built into
them through history. I don't want to
affirm those though I do sometimes speak
of the divine less often but I'll talk
about God but the consciousness which
one can encounter which one can dissolve
into the intelligence the genius I mean
just to experience briefly the
intelligence of of the mind that's
generating the universe and the
compassion and love and wisdom and you
know when you just look at life. It
looks hard. I mean, it it is hard and it
looks like it could have been created by
a a a desperate because it is so
seemingly cruel. But in order to
understand the genius of it and the
wisdom of it and the compassion of it,
you have to be able to step back and
look very deep. It's like stepping back
off of the planet to understand what's
happening on the planet. And in that
context, we experience, you can
experience the universe as this
magnificent
garden that has been created
specifically for our transformation, our
share of it, our transformation. And we
have unlimited amount of time to
continue to learn and grow in this
garden. And it's a it's not an easy
garden. It's a hard place to live and
grow, but it offers us infinite
potential to develop the essential being
that we are. And our essential being is
the divine being, our light of the
divine. We come from the divine. We are
a spark of the divine light. And yet
we're small and kind of immature in the
early stages, but we develop it and
develop it and develop it until
eventually we can become a being that
has complete control over their
incarnation, complete control over the
health of their body, complete control
over the wealth of their mind and
creativity. And we're growing and
growing and growing to in this direction
toward that direction. And I guess one
of the other major takeaways is an
understanding of where we are in
history, where humanity is. And here
so many visionary experiences that
humanity is coming to a turning point.
Humanity is coming to a bifurcation
point, a radical deconstruction followed
by a reconstruction at a higher
organizational level.
I think we are entering after hundreds
of thousands years of re reincarnation
where we have been just dating the
future human lifetime by lifetime by
lifetime just dating the future human's
form. We are now have entered the period
of labor. And the day of labor is a very
intense, very dangerous time, very uh
painful time.
But when it's over, the mother gives
birth to a new child. And I think
humanity is in the process of giving
birth to a new child to the latest
iteration of its own uh fundamental
form. I think we're we're witnessing in
this century and the next a shift in the
in the collective psyche, a shift in the
fundamental architecture of the
collective unconscious so that all
future human beings who are born after
we make this transition will be living
in the context of a different
fundamentally structured psyche. Um this
is what I call the birth of the diamond
soul. I think that after all these years
of incarnating, we are reaching a period
in history where these lives are coming
together inside us. And as they come
together, we first have to purify and
heal all their broken and hurt pieces.
But as we do that, they move into deeper
and deeper synthesis. And eventually
either gradually or suddenly
there is an ignition that takes place
and the soul is born. And that is the
soul is the intelligence that holds all
of our experiences through all of our
incarnations. And that I think is the
emerging future human in history. The
soul is being born inside human history.
So, how can I pick and choose which of
those concepts are the most important?
>> Yeah, I know. Well, you you said in the
book that there are many many layers to
heaven and to the death experience and
that there is no hell, but there is
confrontation and accountability.
Is that what many people, you know, um
regard as the life review?
>> Yeah.
>> Karma.
Tell us a little bit more about that.
>> You know, our understandings of the God
and our understandings of life have been
so primitive historically. I mean, we
we're we only began to make contact,
experiential contact with the core
essential nature of our being, the
divine nature of our being about five or
6 thousand years ago as a species. And
we're just getting started.
And so many of our concepts of God and
punishment and reward and and heaven,
hell, I think are just they're just
completely inadequate to really
understand the true scale and scope of
of the intention of creation.
uh when we die
when we die in the life review we
encounter not only a detailed
remembering of everything we've ever
done in this lifetime but we also
experience how it impacted how it
touched the lives of those around us
both directly and indirectly touches
their lives and to the extent that we
have made bad choices then that comes
back to us in the experience erience of
hell. And to the extent that we've made
good choices, that comes back to us in
the experience of heaven. But in the
end, the goal of this whole system is
not to punish us or reward us in some
cheap way, but to educate us, to teach
us so that we can learn. So we learn
from our mistakes and we learn from the
things we've done well and we keep on
growing. We keep on moving through.
The idea that infinite intelligence and
infinite compassion could produce
something like the eternal damnation
that hell envisions is just ridiculous.
It just
it's done so much damage I think to
human beings through history and it's
just wrong.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Mhm. You know, it's the
experiences you've had and the the
concept of the infinite is a very hard
concept. You know, to think that you
could go on journeying and journeying
and journeying and and reincarnating and
reincarnating,
you know, the mind has to get to a point
where it says enough. You know,
[laughter] I don't want to do this
anymore. It's it's it's endless.
>> Yeah.
How do you feel about that?
>> I think when we die uh we go home. I
mean we return to spirit and we return
to our soul the larger in consciousness
and we re we are brought back into
peace. We're brought back into wholeness
uh and we're brought back home. Now the
trick is there are many many levels of
home. Uh and so you can experience
homecoming in the spiritual world at an
introductory level, an intermediate
level and a very advanced level. There
are many levels of joy. Uh so I think
there is a sense in which we get to stop
and pause and rest and refresh ourselves
after every incarnation. Now there are
sometimes some people die under such
traumatic circumstances that can get
thrown off in different ways but for the
most part most people return home
without any difficulties.
When we are there we are restored. We
are reconnected with the divine. And
it's in that context
where we make the choice of first
whether to incarnate again and where to
reincarnate again and ask what to
reincarnate again. So what sounds and so
I think it's natural as we go through
life if we live our life well we're
tired at the end. We don't the idea of
living multiple times is like that's
exhausting. We're already tired. But
from the soul's perspective, it's from
the period from the perspective of
having been refreshed and rejuvenated
that we voluntarily choose another
course of instruction to deepen
ourselves as a human being and to help
other human beings because eventually it
becomes clear we're not in this alone.
We're all in this together. And it's the
most natural thing in the world to want
to help other human beings in their own
evolutionary journey.
you know, [snorts]
um, when you say that there are so many
different levels, um, you know, that
makes a lot of sense to me. So many
people write about the afterlife, have
messages from the afterlife, hear about,
you know, how the loved ones are living
in the afterlife or existing and they're
all so contradictory.
>> Um, but if there are many levels, you
know, then that really does explain a
lot. But the other thing I want to talk
about is you talked earlier about um
transformation. You know we are on a
journey of transformation and we are
these sparks and it makes me think then
that we must be very young sparks if we
need [laughter] to keep on being refined
and transformed. I mean do older sparks
not come back?
>> Good question. Uh
good question.
And again to even begin to address that
question we have to push back the walls
of our assumptions. We have to really
begin to think deeper and longer and
larger. Uh
the spiritual traditions that believe in
reincarnation say um reincarnation is
obligatory
up to a certain point in our
developmental process. So we may drag
our feet, we may take time, but sooner
or later we have to come back uh to the
reincarnation process. But there comes a
time when you no longer have to. Now the
early Eastern traditions said that's the
that's the critical moment when you can
leave and everybody wants to leave and
that's what the religions are all about.
Moka, escape, getting to the pure land,
getting to heaven. I don't think that's
really what it's all about. I think but
it is a significant turning point
because
once we no longer have to participate in
the reincarnation cycle once it's purely
an it's purely optional then we can
choose to participate freely uh and more
strategically
to support not necessarily our own
individual development maybe but not
necessarily but to be able to support
the development of other human beings.
You might think of them as our
grandchildren, our great grandchildren.
In the end, from a deep spiritual
perspective, they're all our children.
They're all our grandchildren. All of
humanity is. Now, there are some beings,
I think, who have reached that point and
they've gone on to explore other
dimensions of existence. Uh the physical
universe is only one dimension of a
multi-dimensional cosmos in spiritual
reality. So as vast as a physical
universe is,
it seems to be only one
universe out of a multi-universe system.
So in order to sort of ask are there no
are there no old souls here or where do
old sparks of light go that just takes
us really deep into the vast expanse of
things [snorts] you know when the Buddha
was asked this question he didn't he
refused to answer it he about where does
an enlightened being go he said um that
however he answered it it would confuse
the listener and it was better to Just
work on your own transformation
until you can have the experience of
awakening yourself and then you'll know
for your own truth where we're going
when we die and what's available to us
when we die because if you say the
awakened one does not exist as they die
uh then that's a leads to a mistake. If
you say that the awakened one does exist
when they die, that also leads to a
mistake because the conditions are so
different
>> than that either or recognizes.
>> You um talked about this incredible
intelligent consciousness, this
>> I'll call it a divine being because I
don't know how else to describe it. But
of course, calling it a being minimizes
it. It's it's infinite. Um,
is this something that we all can
experience?
>> Oh yes, absolutely. Because its nature
is our nature. And [snorts] so when we
experience the deepest aspect of our own
being, we experience its being. We
experience its nature. It's impossible
to step out of this being. This being,
the body of this being is the body of
the universe. All the vast expanse of
spiritual reality is the consciousness
of the universe. The non-physical aspect
of this of this being and again like you
I hesitate to call it a being uh because
that gives it kind of a boundary quality
and there are no boundaries. Yeah.
>> Uh but yeah this is not only can we
experience it but it is our destiny to
experience it. And I think when we die,
we return to the remembrance of this
nature.
And that's why we want to incarnate
again in order to deepen our experience
of our essential nature. It's kind of
like when we die, our cup is filled to
the brim. But we can have a half a cup,
a threequarters of a cup, a full cup, or
two cups, you know, and we want a bigger
and bigger cup so we can experience more
and more of the divine bliss.
>> You you said in the book um how painful
it was. It became painful to leave the
presence of that being and that's
ultimately one of the reasons why you
stopped having the sessions. Have you
found other ways to experience it that
aren't so painful?
>> The full intensity of communion with
[laughter] light of existence. No, I
have not found other ways of
experiencing it in its full intensity.
Uh I have committed myself to grabbing
physical existence, my physical
existence and not letting it go and
learning to love the manifest body of
the divine in that I see around me in
every person and in the stars at night.
uh I am comfortable in this world and I
love this world and I do my spiritual
practice and you know but in terms of
getting access to those same dimensions
of uh diamond luminosity no I've had to
let go of that for the time being that
said I know there are beings who do you
know I know there are great spiritual
beings truly uh the you know the
mahasidas the great beings who are able
to live in conscious communion with
those subtle plains of existence. I
don't happen to be one of those beings
yet. [laughter]
So still hope I I think if I practice
every day for the rest of my life in
this incarnation, I still not would not
be able to realize in my particular case
in traditional contemplative practice
the levels of reality that I access that
I was accessing after 20 years of work
in this particular form of of practice
with psychedelics.
>> [snorts]
>> But knowing what you know, knowing what
it feels like, knowing you know where
you've been and what you've experienced,
it must make life a little bit hard. You
know, knowing that that is always there.
>> It makes it hard and it makes it easier.
It makes it easier because now I know I
know it in my heart and in my bones that
we are always surrounded and and sused
with this divine intelligence and love
and one can draw on it continuously. So
that in that sense it makes it easier
because the the greatest burden I think
of physical existence is not knowing and
we're we get driven crazy by not knowing
>> and that burden has been lifted from me
but it does make it hard in the sense
that to once you and this is nothing
unique to psychedelic journeys people
who have deep ndes near-death
experiences the same thing they they
have to it's a challenge to come back
into time and space and be content with
living here and that aspect it is harder
because you know that it's there and you
know that it's only your own silliness
which is keeping you from enjoying it
fully right here right now. It's only my
own imperfections
which are keeping me out of that state
right here right now.
>> Um this 200 100 200 years um of
transformation that we are going to go
through.
>> Yeah. It's it's a wonderful thing and it
gives a lot of people a lot of hope and
goodness knows you know we're all aware
of what's happening in the world today
and how challenging that is to live with
and many people are very afraid but when
we're in a human form if we haven't had
the experiences that you've had
>> it's also very hard to think
I'm not going to see it in my lifetime
I've got to wait a couple of hundred
years
that it just sounds too much
>> you know let me just
the timetable was not given to me uh and
the details of the transformation were
not given to me in my visionary
experiences what I was given was the
experience of the human species
undergoing the pain of a deep and
profound global collapse
uh and this and the beauty and the first
and the certainty that we would make it
through. And a lot of people are
beginning to think that we're not going
to make it through. It's an extinction
event. My visionary experience is that
we do make it through and we are
profoundly changed in this process.
You know, I it's kind of like, you know,
when a woman starts labor in the morning
when she's starting labor, she might
think, "Oh, I don't want to do this
today. Let's do something else." But
there's no choice. We're in it. And I
think that's what's going to happen to
us now. We may not want to be in it, but
we're in it. And the key to to
navigating it well is to do it well.
Each of us has a small share in this
collective transformation. And the
actions of individuals
have disproportionately or large
outcomes in a time of intense and
accelerated change and nonlinear
systems. so that each one of us can have
a positive impact on a good outcome of
this crisis that we're going through.
And I don't know how long it's going to
take us, but this is the work of the
hour. This is what we are all here
working toward.
>> Yeah. And it's not as though we're not
going to experience that transformation
because if we keep coming back,
>> you know, we we're definitely going to
be a part of it.
>> Yeah. And I think the joy when we begin
to experience in between our lifetimes
and on earth eventually when we
experience this new human being that is
coming forward in history and we aren't
you know nature or the force behind
nature is giving birth to this being.
When we experience this being it's
just like experience a newborn babe it
will all be worth it. All the pain and
suffering will be worth it. This is of
an extraordinary event in human history.
>> Chris Bash, I'm afraid we're out of
time. Thank you for adding your 10 best
list of spiritual books to the No BS
Spiritual Book Club's library of
recommendations. And thank you for
taking that journey for all of us.
>> Thank you, Sandy. Thank you for the work
you're doing. Thank you for the
tremendous source of information that
you bring into the world. You're just
doing such good work. and uh thank you
for the attention. You've you've paid my
work.
>> Thank you, Chris. So, Christopher Bash's
10 best list can be found at the no BS
spiritual book club. And if you go to
Sandy's bookworms, you can download an
excerpt from LSD and the mind of the
universe, diamonds from heaven, which is
published by Inner Traditions Bearing
Company. For more information about
Chris's articles, events, and other
books, visit his website at
chrisbash.com.
This show is also available as a free
downloadable podcast at home times.com,
Spotify, iTunes, Amazon, Audible, and
all of the major podcast platforms. So,
if you'd rather listen um than view, you
know where to go for it. That's it for
this week. I'm Sandy Sedbury. I'll be
back at the same time next week with
another 10 best interview for the no BS
spiritual book club. Till then, it's
goodbye from me and thank you deeply to
Chris Bash.
>> Thank you.
>> If today's conversation [music]
sparked your curiosity, you'll love our
other shows, the synergy sessions, where
leading edge thinkers collide in bold,
unscripted dialogues that ignite [music]
new possibilities between realms and
reason. where we journey into the
mysterious consciousness, energy, and
the hidden layers of reality. [music]
Where science converges with spirit in
ways you've never imagined. And the no
BS [music] spiritual book club where
leading edge new thought speakers,
teachers, authors, and luminaries who've
walked this path before you share the 10
books that had the biggest impact
[music] on their life journey. All three
shows are available on YouTube, Spotify,
[music] Substack, and all major podcast
platforms. For more information, visit
[music] sedgebeer.com.
That's sedg.com.